What is DRAM? *Dynamic Random Access Memory*

Describe what the terms stick, memory module, and Dimm refer to. *These all
mean the same thing-- they refer to the RAM installed in a motherboard's RAM
slots.*

What is SRAM? *Static Random-Access Memory*

Describe how the CPU interacts from memory. *The CPU interacts with memory via
the memory controller chip (MCC). When the CPU wants an item in memory, the MCC
grabs it from memory via the address bus then passes it to the CPU.*

What components of the system are connected by the address bus? *The address
bus connects the MCC to RAM.*

Where can the MCC be found? *The MCC ay be integrated with the CPU (on-die)
or it may be part of the Northbridge (on older systems with a separate
northbridge from the CPU)*

What does it mean for memory to be volatile? *Volatile memory loses any stored
contents when it stops receiving power*

Today's RAM is a set of *integrated circuits* (ICs) that works at high speed.

What is memory refreshing and why is it needed? *Memory refreshing is the act
of reading information from a specific area of memory and immediately rewriting
that information vack to the same area waithout modifying it. Refreshing is
needed because, as DRAM is contained as electrons within capacitors,
capacitors lose their charge over time, causing the data to fade.*

What type of RAM needs to be refreshed? What type of RAM does not? *DRAM
(Dynamic RAM) needs to be refreshed. SRAM (Static RAM) does not.*

Where can you normally find SRAM? *SRAM is often used as cache memory for CPUs;
As buffers on the motherboard or within hard drives; as temporary storage for
LCD screens.*

Which is faster: SRAM or DRAM? *SRAM is faster than DRAM, and usually found in
smaller quantities.*

Is SRAM volatile? Is DRAM? *Both types of RAM are volatile-- they lose their
data when they lose power*

What type of memory is nonvolatile? *Read-Only Memory (ROM) is nonvolatile*

What is SDRAM? Describe its functionality. *SDRAM is Synchronous DRAM. It is
DRAM that is synchronized to the base clock (or 'bus speed') of the motherboard*

What is DDR? *DDR is Double Data Rate, the most commonly used type of RAM. It
is also called DDR SDRAM, as DDR RAM is synchronized to the bus speed just like
SDRAM.*

How does DDR work? *DDR tranfers twice the data at the same clock speed. It
does this by transferring data on the rising AND falling edges of each clock
signal.*

DDR has a ___-bit wide bus, allowing for ___ bytes of data (x2) per cycle. *64;
8*

What is the equation (without megatransfers) for DDR data transfer rate(bandwidth)? *Clock speed x bytes x 2 =
Data Transfer Rate*

When you perform a bandwidth equation, be sure to solve for *bytes*, as that is
what these rates measure.

All types of DDR1 (the original DDR) RAM run at *2.5* V.

How do you solve for data transfer rate using megatransfers? *X MT/s x 8 = Data
Transfer Rate*

What is the data transfer rate of DDR-200 RAM? *1600 MB/s: 200 MT/s x 8 = 1600
MB/s*

The DDR DIMM has *184* pins and a specifically placed notch to enforce proper
slots.

Laptops use smaller configurations of DDR with different pin configurations
known as *SODIMMS*.

DDR2 builds on DDR1 by decreasing ___ and increasing ___. *voltage; speed*

DDR2 RAM runs at *1.8* V.

DDR2 increases speed through *faster signaling, which requires additional
pins*.

Standard DDR2 DIMMs have *240* pins.

Can you use a DDR2 stick in a DDR1 slot? *no*

What is the data transfer rate of DDR2-800? *800 MT/s x 8 = 6,400 MB/s*

DDR2 DIMMs have *240* pins.

Can you place DDR3 modules in DDR2 or DDR1 slots? *No-- DDR3 is not
backwards-compatible*

DDR3 uses a voltage of *1.2 to 1.5 V*.

How can you get the clock speed from a DDR standard name? *I/O Clock speed is
half of the standard name's value, in MH/z*

How can you get the Megatransfers per second from a DDR standard name? *The
MT/s matches the standard name's value.*

How can you get the module name from a DDR3 standard name? *The module name is
PC3-X, where X is the data transfer rate, as can be calculates from the module
name's value with (MT/s x 8 = DTR)*

What are the clock speed, MT/s, Transfer rate, and module name of DDR3-800?
*Clock speed: 400 MHz; 800 MT/s; Transfer rate: 6400 MB/s; Module Name: PC3-6400*

What are the 1. Clock Speed, 2. MT/s, 3. Transfer Rate, and 4. Module Name of
DDR3-1066? *1. 533 MHz; 2. 1066 MT/s; 3. 8533 MB/s; 4. PC3-8500*

What are the 1. Clock Speed, 2. MT/s, 3. Transfer Rate, and 4. Module Name of
DDR3-1333? *1. 667 MHz; 2. 1333 MT/s; 3. 10667 MB/s; 4. PC3-10600*

What are the 1. Clock Speed, 2. MT/s, 3. Transfer Rate, and 4. Module Name of
DDR3-1600? *1. 800 MHz; 2. 1600 MT/s; 3. 12800 MB/s; 4. PC3-12800*

What are the 1. Clock Speed, 2. MT/s, 3. Transfer Rate, and 4. Module Name of
DDR3-1866? *1. 933 MHz; 2. 1866 MT/s; 3. 14933 MB/s; 4. PC3-14900*

What are the 1. Clock Speed, 2. MT/s, 3. Transfer Rate, and 4. Module Name of
DDR3-2133? *1. 1066 MHz; 2. 2133 MT/s; 3. 17066 MB/s; 4. PC3-17000*

What are the 1. Clock Speed, 2. MT/s, 3. Transfer Rate, and 4. Module Name of
DDR3-2400? *1. 1200 MHz; 2. 2400 MT/s; 3. 19200 MB/s; 4. PC3-19200*

Given a sticker on a DIMM with the labels 'KVR1333D3N9HK2/8G', 'Kit of 2',
and '1.5V', what are the 1. DDR standard, 2. Capacity, and 3. Voltage? *the
standard is DDR-1333 (from '1333' and 'D3'); the capacity is 8GB (from '8G'), but only when installed
as a kit of two modules ('Kit of 2'); and the memory runs at 1.5V.*

How can you solve for data transfer rate from the clock speed of a DDR3 module?
*Double the clock speed gives the megatransfers, which can then be multiplied
by 8 to solve for bandwidth*

How can you solve for data transfer rate from the module name of a DDR3 module?
*The data transfer rate is in the module name: e.g. PC3-10600 can transfer
10,600 MB/s*

The voltage range for DDR4 is *1.2 to 1.35 V*.

DDR4 improves upon DDR3 with *higher module density; higher data transfer
rate*.

Is DDR4 backward-compatible? *no*

What are the 1. Clock Speed, 2. MT/s, 3. Transfer Rate, and 4. Module Name of
DDR4-2133? *1. 1066 MHz; 2. 2133 MT/s; 3. 17000 MB/s; 4. PC4-17000*

What are the 1. Clock Speed, 2. MT/s, 3. Transfer Rate, and 4. Module Name of
DDR4-2400? *1. 1200 MHz; 2. 2400 MT/s; 3. 19200 MB/s; 4. PC4-19200*

How many tansfer are there at a rate of 2133 MT/s? *2.133 Billion
transfers/second*

What are the 1. Clock Speed, 2. MT/s, 3. Transfer Rate, and 4. Module Name of
DDR4-2666? *1. 1333 MHz; 2. 2666 MT/s; 3. 21300 MB/s; 4. PC4-21300*

What are the 1. Clock Speed, 2. MT/s, 3. Transfer Rate, and 4. Module Name of
DDR4-3200? *1. 1600 MHz; 2. 3200 MT/s; 3. 25600 MB/s; 4. PC4-25600*

In modern computers, there is a ___-bit bus (or data channel) between the
memory and the ___. *64; memory controller*

In single channel, one or more sticks of RAM can be installed, but they share
the same *channel*.

How does dual-channel architecture double the data thoroughput? *Two separate
64-bit channels are employed together, resulting in a 128-bit bus*

How do the memory banks appear on a motherboard supporting dual-channel
architecture? *The motherboard will have color-coded matching banks*

How do you install a pair of modules to a dual-channel motherboard? *Install
the modules to matching colored banks*

If you have a new dual-channel motherboard with two pairs of banks/four slots, named DIMM
1 (blue), DIMM 2 (Blue), DIMM 3 (Black), and DIMM 4 (Black), how should you
install the first pair of modules? *You want to install sequentially based on
naming, so you would install your first two module the the blue slots, DIMM 1
and DIMM 2.*

What should be considered when purchasing RAM sticks to serve as a pair in a
bank? *The DIMMs should be identical for best performance. You want the
capacity, speed, and number of chips to be the same.*

Triple-channel architecture access three memory modules simultaneously,
effectively creating a *192*-bit bus.

What two configurations may a triple-channel architecture have? *1. A
motherboard may have three channels of two differen color memory slots each. 2.
Three matching slots (e.g. all blue) and a separate color slot (e.g. black)
that can be used for single-channel mode if triple-channel isn't used.*

Quad-channel is common in computers that use *DDR4*.

What happens if you install less than four modules to a motherboard set up for
quad-channel architecture? *The architecture will work, but will downgrade to
the architecture using that number of modules (if you install two modules, you
get dual channel, if you install three modules you get triple-channel)*

Memory latency or Column Access Strobe (CAS) occurs when *a memory controller
tries to access data from a memory module*.

What is latency? *Latency is a slight delay (usually in nanoseconds)while the
memory module responds to the memory controller*

Latency is given a reating of *CAS (aka the CL)*.

Single-sided refers to a memory module with *a single bank of chips*.

What is double-sided memory? *Double-sided memory modules have their chips
divided into two sides, or banks. Only one 'side' can be seen by the computer
at any one time, and must switch to see the other.*

What happens when single-sided memory has chips on both physical sides of the
stick? *It doesn't matter-- single-sided memory may have chips on one or both
sides of the physical stick. What's significant is that the computer can see
all of the chips at any given time. Double-sided meanwhile, logically has two
'sides' and only one or the other may be seen by the computer at any given
moment.*

RAM parity is when *memory stores an extra bit (known as a parity bit) used for
error detection*.

What is ECC? *Error Correction Code (ECC) in RAM can detect or correct errors.
This is the slowest and most expensive type of RAM.*

What type of RAM is a module named PC3-10600E likely to be? *DDR3 ECC*

What is registered memory? *Registered memory (aka 'buffered memory') improves
signal integrity between RAM and the memory controller vy electrically
buffering the signals using an extra register. This can cause additional
latency.*

What type of RAM would PC3-10600R likely be? *DDR3 registered memory*

How does fully buffered memory work? *Fully buffered memory builds upon
registered memory with an advanced memory buffer between the module and
controller. It requires an entirely different memory module with a notch in a
different location, making it incompatible with motherboards supporting regular
DDR or registered DDR. IThis kind of module is known as a FB-DIMM*

What type of memory module would PC3-10600F likely be? *DDR3 Fully-buffered
memory; This could also apply to a module PC3-10600FB*

Name the pinouts of DDR1, DDR2, DDR3, and DDR4. *184; 240; 240; 288*

Which knows the location of bytes in memory: the CPU or the memory controller?
*The memory controller knows: The CPU knows what bytes it wants, but not the
location of those bytes.*

Simply out, what are the steps to install a stick of RAM? *Orient the RAM
properly; Insert the RAM into the slot; Press down until the ears lock*

How can you orient RAM propery before insertion? *Check the notch on the
module; there should be a proportionate break in the slot on the motherboard.*

How can you carefully press the module down into the slot? *Keep the thumbs as
close to the edge as possible in order to keep pressure evenly distributed*

How should you test correct installation of RAM? *Boot into BIOS and check that
the RAM type and speed are properly recognized.; Access the OS and make sure it
boots correctly.; View the RAM within Windows via System or Task Manager
(checking capacity) or use CPU-Z.; Try testing the RAM by opening several
applications and watching for issues or delays.*

If you were to install one stick of DDR3-1333 and one stick of DDR3-1066, into
a motherboard supporting both speeds, what would happen? *The system would run
at the lower speed of 1066.*

What is underclocking? *Underclocking is when you install RAM of two different
supported speeds, causing the system to run at whichever speed is lower.*

What might need to be done when installing the latest type of RAM that a motherboard
can support? *It's likely that you'll need to flash the BIOS, especially in a
multichannel environment*

What is the first thing to check if a user has installed new RAM and it isn't
working? *Verify RAM compatibility-- no matter what the user says*

If the computer will not boot, what troubleshooting steps should be taken?
*Verify compatibility; check RAM seating; Clean the RAM and slot if necessary;
If the computer has two memory modules, try booting with just one or try moving
RAM to different slots; Test the memory with a known good module.*

What is a heatspreader? Why might they be needed? *Heatspreaders are copper or aluminum heat sinks, just
like that used by the CPU. RAM can overheat and cause intermittent shutdowns*

If BIOS indicates a memory error, what troubleshooting steps should one take?
*This is indicated by BIOS through a grey message on the screen and a flashing
cursore or beeps. If beeps, reference the motherboard documentation for beep
codes.; A BIOS setting may be incorrect-- try restoring a saved version of BIOS
if available, or reset to BIOS defaults.; If nothing else, a BIOS update may
fix it.*

How can RAM be associated with a stop error/BSOD? *While these are usually due
to device driver errors (poor code), they can be associated with a physical
fault in memory. A nonmaskable interrupt (NMI) can interrupt the processor to
gain its attention regarding nonrecoverable hardware errors, resulting in a
BSOD*

How should you respond to a BSOD? *If there's one BSOD, you can probably ignore
it (per the author/CompTIA!!). If it happens repeatedly, however, write down
the information on the stop error screen and reference it to troubleshoot.*

What can cause page faults (hard faults), out-of-memory erros or
low-on-virtual-memory errors? *These are usually issues with the application or
OS that was running. However, if a particular application keeps failing, or you
get a message listing a particular memory location repeatedly, it can indicate
a problem with RAM.*

What can cause a general protection fault (GPF)? *These are uncommon and are
usually related to the OS, running applications, and CPU. It is possible that
memory errors can cause a GPF.*

How can you test memory? *Programs such as third-party MemTest86 and the
Windows Memory Diagnostics Tool can be used to test memory.*

How can you access the Memory Diagnostic Tool? *Run msched.exe; from the
Windows Recovery Environment*
