All of the machine language commands that the CPU understands make up the
CPU's *instruction set*.

What is the function of the clock wire? *It tells the CPU, via a charge, that
another piece of information is waiting to be processed.*

A single charge to the CLK wire is called a *clock cycle*

The maximum number of clock cycles that a CPU can handle in a given period of
time is referred to as its *clock speed*.

Clock speed is measured in *hertz*.

How many clock cycles do each of the following units denote? 1 Hz, 1 MHz, 1GHz: *1
cycle per second; 1 million cycles per second; 1 billion cycles per second*

Must a CPU run at its clock speed? *No-- it can safely run at any speed that
does not exceed its clock speed*

The *system crystal* is the quartz oscillator on the motherboard determines the
speed at which a CPU and the rest of the PC operate.

What causes one CPU to run faster than another? *Subtle differences/flaws in
the silicone make the difference.*

How does the system crystal set CPU speed? Describe its process. *The crystal
sends out an electric pulse as a signal which goes to a clock chip. The clock
chip adjusts the pulse, usually increasing it. The clock chip then fires the
charge on the CLK wire.*

Before installing a CPU on a system, you must verify that the crystal and clock
chip *send the correct clock pulse for that CPU*

The CPU *registers* are tiny storage areas on the CPU made of microscopic
semiconductor circuits that hold charges.

Devices that in any way hold ones and zeros that the CPU accesses are known
generically as *memory*.

An IF statement in a CPU program is also called a *branch* by CPU makers.

Memory must not only store programs but also *the result of the programs*

An individual 1 or 0 is called *a bit*.

Four bits = *a nibble*.

Eight bits = *a byte*.

16 bits = *a word*.

32 bits = *a double word*.

64 bits = *a paragraph or quad word*.

Computers use what type of memory for the main system memory? *DRAM (Dynamic
RAM)*

What makes DRAM dynamic? *DRAM needs a constant charge along with a periodic
refresh of the circuits to make up for for loss of electrons*

What is the chip responsible for the mechanics of retrieving the specific row
of data from RAM that the CPU needs and putting it on the EDB? *The memory
controller chip (MCC)*

iHow does the CPU tell the MCC which line of code it needs? *Via a second set
of wires between the CPU and MCC called the address bus*

How is addressing handled on the address bus wires? *Wires are turned on and
off in different patterns, and each pattern points to one byte of RAM.*

What equation yields the maximum RAM that a CPU can handle? What is another
name for this number? *Given the number of address bus wires as x, 2^(x)
results in the maximum RAM the CPU canhandle. This number is called the address
space.*

What are the major units based on these powers of 2: 10, 20, 30, 40.
*2^10 = 1 kilo; 2^20 = 1 mega; 2^30 = giga; 2^40 = 1 tera*

Is zero-padding numbers in binary permitted? *Yes*

Can you mix Intel and AMD CPUs and motherboards? *no*

AMD and Intel use ___ to keep track of different variations within ___. You
need to know both to make a proper CPU recommendation. *Code names; models*

What are important features of CPUs for mobile devices? *Consime as little
electricity as possible to extend battery and create less heat*

Saving energy by making the CPU run more slowly is generically called
*throttling*.

All modern CPUs run at some multiple of the *system clock speed*.

Modern CPUs report to the motherboard through a function called *CPUID (CPU
identifier)* and the speed and multiplier are set automatically.

Support for running more than one OS at a time is called *virtualization*.

Modern CPUs can process multiple commands and parts of commands in parallel,
known as *parallel execution*.

To get a command from the data bus, do calculation, and get the answer back
out onto the data bus, what four main steps, or stages, does the CPU perform?
*1. Fetch - get the data from the EDB; 2. Decode - figure out type of command
to be executed; 3. Execure - perform calculation; 4. Write - Send data back
onto the EDB*

Circuits are organized in a conveyer-belt fashion called a *pipeline*. 

How does pipelining work? *Each stage does its job with each clock cycle so
none sit idle*

What is a pipeline stall? *a pipeline stall is when one of the stages hits a
complex comand requiring more than one clock cycle, forxing the pipeline to
stop*

What is the CPU's ALU? *The arithmetic logic unit: handles integer math*

What is the CPU's FPU? *Floating point unit: handles complex numbers*

Because the CPU runs faster than the RAM can supply it with code, you'll always
get pipeline stalls called *wait states*.

To reduce wait states, CPUs come with built-in, high-speed RAM called *static
RAM (SRAM)*.

SRAM used to preload as many instructions as possible and keep copies of
already-run data is called a *cache*.

With the advance of CPU caching, the address bus and EDB were lumped into a
single term called the ___ and the connection between the CPU and
the L2 cache became known as the ___. *frontside bus; backside bus*

To keep up with faster processors, motherboards manufacturers bagen to double
and even quadruple the size of the frontside bus. These are sometimes referred
to as ___ and ___ frontside buses. *double-pumped; quad-pumped*

Describe the relative size and speed of the L1, L2, and L3 caches. *L1 is the
smallest and fastest cache; L2 is bigger and slower than the L1 cache; L3 is
the biggest and slowest cache.*

What is referred to by the L1, L2, and so on caches? *These are the built-in
caches of memory on the CPU. the numbers go in order of which cache the CPU
checks (e.g. L1 is checked first)*

What is hyper-threading? *A feature of the Intel Pentium 4, hyper-threading
enabled the processor to run multiple threads at the same time, generically
called simultaneous multithreading.*

What are the limitations of multithreading? *The OS and application have to be
designed to take advantage of the feature; although the CPU simulates the
actions of a second processor, it doesn't double the processing power*

What creates a dual-core architecture? *Combining two CPUs (or cores) into a
single chip, creating two execution units, or two pipelines, but the two share
caches and RAM*

Are the multicore CPUs beyond dual-core? *Yes-- multicore CPUs can have 4, 6,
or 8 cores*

Almost all current miltuprocessors have a(n) *integrated memory controller
(IMC)* in the CPU to optimize the flow of information into and out from it.

Different CPUs handle different types and capacities of *RAM*.

The generic term for the video processor is a *graphics processing unit (GPU)*

With the AMD *accelerated processing unit (APU)*, the GPU has access to all
levels of cache on the CPU.

Motherboards are manufactures with various different types of *sockets*, which
acomodate different families of CPU.

Make note! Need to study the AMD and Intel CPU families and their socket names.
*Okay*.

Intel CPUs use a ____ package, whereas AMD CPUs use a ___ package. *Land Grid
Array (LGA); Pin Grid Array (PGA)*

Describe the physical attributes of the LGA package. *The LGA package features
hundreds of contact points on the underside of the CPU which line up with pins
in the socket.*

Describe the physical attributes of the PGA package. *The PGA package features
hundreds of tiny pins on the underside of the CPU which line up with holes in
the socket*

In either socket style, how do you get access to use the CPU socket? *You
release the retaining mechanism by pyushing the level down slightly and then
away from the socket, then raise the arm fully and move the retaining bracket.*

What are ZIF sockets? *Zero insertion force: you gently drop the socket into
place once it's aligned, never exerting force to insert pins into holes.*

In electrical terms, CPUs consume *wattage, or watts* of electrical power.

The more *transistors* the CPU has, the more power they need and the hotter the
yget.

Almost every CPU uses a combination of a ____ and a ___ to wick heat away from
the CPU. *Heat sink; fan assembly*

How does liquid cooling work? *A liquid, usually water, is run through a metal
block sitting on top of the CPU and absorbing heat. The liquid is then run via
tubes out of the block and into soemthing that cools the liquid, then it runs
through the block again.*

Any liquid cooling system consists of three main parts: *A hollow metal block
on the CPU; A pump to move the liquid; A device to cool the liquid*

What is a key reference point for determining the orientation of a heat sink
and fan assembly? *The ability of the fan's power cable to reach the standout
on the motherboard*

Before inserting the heat sink, what step should be taken? *Apply a small
amount of thermal compound, or 'heat dope', to the heat sink if it isn't
pre-doped. If it is, just remove the small tape covering the dope.*

What is overclocking? *Deliberately running systems at a higher clock speed
than that for which the CPU is rated.*

What are the risks of overclocking a CPU? *It immediately voids most
warranties; has been known to destroy CPUs; might make the system unstable and
prone to lockups and reboots.*

Most motherboards have a jumper setting called *CMOS clear* that makes the CMOs
go back to default settings.

How can you clear CMOS? *Turn off the PC; Locate a shunt (tiny plastic piece)
and place it over the two jumper wires for a moment; Restart the PC and
immediately go into CMOS and restore settings needed*

CPU issues generally fall into two categories: *Overheating; Catastrophic
failures*

The vast majority of problems with CPUs come from *faulty installaation;
Environmental issues that cause overheating*

Failure to install a CPU properly results in either ___ or ___. *Nothing-- you
push the power button an nothing happens; A system lock-up in a short period of
time.*

Due to the nature of ZIF sockets, an installation issue is almost certainly not
due to the CPU itself, but rather *the installation of the heat-sink and fan
assembly*.

What are the primary possible causes to investigate in regards to a CPU
installation problem? *1. Too much thermal paste impeding the flow of heat from
the CPU to the heat sink; 2. Not enough thermal paste or thermal paste unevenly
spread; 3. Failure to connect the fan power to the motherboard.*

How can environmental factors cause a CPU failure? *The CPU needs adequate
ventilation. The inside of the case needs to get hot air out through one or
more exhause fans and cool air back in the front vent. If vents are clogged or
fans are broken or blocked, the trapped hot air can overwhelm the cooling
devices.*

What is a Windows stop error? *BSOD*

What events tend to accompany a catastrophic failure? *BSOD or PC going black;
The PC may emit a pop; There may be a smell of burnt electronics, in which
case, it is prudent to seek the strongest source of the smell in the case*
