What is the north bridge? What is another name for it and what are its
functions? *The north bridge is a member of the motherboard's chip set. It is
also called the MCH (Memory Controller Hub). Its basic functions are: to act as
the memory controller, the PCI Express controller, the AGP bus controller, and
to interface with the south bridge chip.*

What is the south bridge? What is another name for it and what are its
functions? *The south bridge is a member of the chip set. It is also called to
ICH (I/O Controller Hub). It is connected to the north bridge (or the CPU if it
integrates the north bridge) via a bus and is incharge of controlling I/O
devices and on-board devices, such as ports, the PCI bus, the RTC, and CMOS
memory*

What is the pairing of the Northbridge and the Southbridge called? *The
chipset*

What, collectively, does the chipset accomplish? *The chipset extends the data
bus to every device on the PC. The CPU uses the data bus to move data to and
from all of the devices of the PC*

Just as with the external data bus, the chipset extends the *address bus* to
all of the devices. 

What devices in the computer connect to the address bus? *All of them!*

While various functions of the chipset are often talked about as though they
were still handled by discrete ships, functions like memory controllers,
keyboard controllers, and USB controllers are all just *circuits* on the
Northbridge or Southbridge.

Every time you press a key on the keyboard, a ___ in the keyboard
notices which key you pressed and sends a coded pattern of ones and zeroes
called the ___ to the keyboard controller. *Scanning chip; scan code*

Define BIOS. *BIOS, or Basic Input/Output Services, is the set of routines
stored in read-only memory (ROM) that enable a computer to start the operating system
and to communicate with the various devices in the system.*

The programs dedicated to enabling the CPU to communicate with devices are
called *services*.

Every device on the computer needs *BIOS*.

Motherboards store device controlelr and other support programs which are used
in BIOS pn a special chip called ROM (read-only memory).*

A ROM chip stores programs, called *services*.

ROM chips are *nonvolatile*, meaning that the information stored on ROM isn't
erased when the computer is turned off.

Traditional ROM chips are *read-only*, meaning that once you store a program on
one, you can't change it.

What are the important differences between ROM and RAM? *ROM is 1. Nonvolatile,
and 2. read-only*

Modern motherboards use a type of ROM called ___ ROM that differs from
traditional ROM in that you can update and change the contents through a very
specific process called "___". *Flash ROM; Flashing the ROM*

Every motherboard has a flash ROM chip called the *system ROM chip* because it
contains code that enables your CPU to talk to the basic hardware of your PC.

The system ROM holds hundreds of programs for talking to various hardware which
are collectively called the *system BIOS*.

Techs call programs stored on ROM chips of any sort *firmware*.

Programs stored on erasable media are collectively called *software*.

What two types of hardware does every system BIOS have to support? *1. All of
the hardware that never changes.*; 2. All of the hardware
that might change from time to time, such as RAM, hard drives, and floppy
drives.*

Where does the system store the details of interchangeable pieces of hardware?
*CMOS*

What is the CMOS? *The complementary metal-oxide semiconductor chip stores the
information that describes specific device parameters. It also acts as the RTC
(real-time clock)*

CMOS does not store programs, it only stores *data that is read by BIOS to
complete the programs needed to talk to changeable hardware*.

Today, the CMOS is almost always built into the *Southbridge*.

Most CMOS chips store around *64 KB* of data.

What results if the data stored on CMOS about a particular piece of hardware,
or some of its features, is different from the specs of the actual hardware?
*The computer cannot access that piece of hardware, or said features.*

Every PC ships with a program built into the system ROM called the *CMOS setup
program, or the system setup utility* that enables you to access and modify
CMOS data.

What are the two big BIOS companies? *American Megatrends (AMI) and Phoenix
Technologies*

The *system ROM chip* stores the system BIOS, programs needed by the CPU to
communicate with devices.

The system ROM chip also holds the program that accesses the information stored
on the CMOS chip to support changeable pieces of hardware. This program is
called the ____, or the ___. *CMOS setup program; system setup utility*

The CMOS holds a small amount of data that describes *the changeable pieces of
hardware supported by the system BIOS*.

The setup program itself is stored on the ___ chip, but it edits only the data
on the ___ chip. *ROM; CMOS*

With the Phoenix Award Modular BIOS, motherboard makers buy a boilerplate BIOS
designed for a particular chipset and add or remove options called *modules*
based on the needs of each motherboard.

What does the MB Intelligent Tweaker do? *The M.I.T. is used to change the
voltage and multiplier settings on the motherboard for the CPU from the
defaults. This caters to overclockers and is usually set to Auto or Default*

What is the Advanced Bios Features screen for? *It's basically got a dump of
features not covered in the standard menu and is most often used to select the
boot options*

What is a virtual machine? *A VM is a powerful program that enables you to run
a second or more software-based machine inside of the physical PC*

To support virtualization, CPU manufacturers have added *hardware-based
virtualization*.

Virtualization support is turned *off* by default in BIOS.

Many motherboards support a fetaure called *chassis support intrusion* which
logs whether the case has been opened, based on the tripping of a switch in the
case.

What is the Advanced Chipset Features screen for? *This screen deals with
extremely low-level chipset functions. It should be avoided unless a high-level
tech explicitly instructs it.*

What is the Integrated Peripherals screen used for? *This screen is where you
can enable, disable, and configure the onboard devices.*

What is the Power Management Setup screen for? *This screen is used to set up
power management settings for the system. These setting work in concert, and
sometimes in conflict, with Windows' power settings.*

When overclocking the PC, look for settings that adjust *the CPU's clock and
bus speeds*.

In overclocking, the higher you push clock and bus speeds, the *faster* the PC
will go.

What is PnP? *Plug and Play is how devices automatically work when you snap
them into the PC*

What is PCI? *PCI is a type of slot used for cards*

What does the 'Load Fail-Safe Options' option do? *This option sets everything
for very simple settings, and it may be used when very low-level problems such
as freeze-ups occur.*

What does the 'Load Optimized Defaults' option do? *This option sets the CMOS
to the best possible speed/stability for the system.*

In what two contexts can CMOS setup utilities enable enforcement of passwords?
*1. One for boot; 2. One for accessing the CMOS setup program*

Many CMOS utilities enable monitoring of CPU temperature, system temperature,
and CPU and RAM voltages in the *PC Health Status* menu.

On some motherboards, the CMOS setup program enables you to control the ATA
Security Mode Feature Set, also commonly referred to as *drive lock, or
DriveLock*

What is ATA Security Mode used for? *It is the first line of defensefor
protecting hard disks from unwanted access when a system is lost or stolen*

Some PC manufacturers also include LoJack security features in their BIOS--
what does this add? *With LoJack features, if a PC is stolen you can track its
location, install a key logger, or even remotely shut down your computer*

What does the Trusted Platform Module do? *The TPM acts as a secure
cryptoprocessor. It is a hardware platform for the acceleration of
cryptographic functions and secure storage of associated information*

What is one of the most common uses of TPMs? *Hard disk encryption*

What are the two ways of adding new BIOS programming to a system? *Option ROM;
Device drivers*

How does option ROM work? *Option ROM consists of firmware that etends the
system BIOS and is called by the BIOS. This information is typically stored on
an option ROM chip located on the hardware device.*

How do most BIOS that come on option ROMs tell you that they exist? *They
display information when you boot the system*

What type of device currently always contains its own BIOS via option ROM?
*Video cards*

What is the major shortcoming of option ROM? *it's hard to upgrade*

A *device driver* is a file stored on the PC's hard drive that contains all of
the commands necessary to talk to whatever device it was written to support.

ll operating systems employ a method of loading device drivers into ___ every
time ___. *RAM; the system boots*

How do operating systems know which device drivers to install? *By reading a
file (or files) that lists which device drivers the system needs to load at
boot time. The listed files are copied into RAM, allowing the CPU to
communicate with those devices.*

The generic name for a CD-ROM holding device drivers is *installation disc*.

Windows stores device drivers in *the Registry*.

If you want to access device drivers, do so via *the Device Manager utility*.

In what places may the programming that enables the CPU to communicate with a
device be held? *System ROM on the motherboard; option ROPM on a card/chip; in
a device driver file on the hard drive loaded into RAM at boot*




